---
default_file: Notes/Lecture 16.pdf
---
```slide-note
page: 2,4,5
```
- Say we have 2 disks
- We can split the byte into bits, and every second bit goes to a different disk
	- Bit 0 goes to drive 0
	- Bit 1 goes to drive 1
	- Bit 2 goes to drive 0
	- and so on
- Or you could have bits 0-3 in disk one, and bits 4-7 in disk two, which is another way of data striping
- Generally splitting a file into bits is very tedious
- Instead we could split a file into blocks
	- Each block would go to a different disks
```slide-note
page: 6
```
- RAID 0 is bad because while it's fast, it is not fault-tolerant
	- Therefore, RAID 0 = shit
```slide-note
page: 7
```
- This is done through system software, which slows the CPU
```slide-note
page: 8
```
- Very fast due to the hardware implementation
```slide-note
page: 9-10
```
- ChatGPT gave this lovely explaination:
1. **RAID level 3**: It's like having a backup plan where only one person (a disk) remembers how things were before. If someone forgets something (a disk fails), that one person can remind everyone else.
    
2. **RAID level 4**: Imagine you're working on a group project, and you have a friend (a disk) who remembers what the final version of the project should be. If you lose a piece of your project (a disk fails), your friend can help you recreate it using their memory.
    
3. **RAID level 5**: Now, instead of just one friend remembering everything, everyone in the group (all disks) helps remember bits and pieces of the project. If someone forgets something (a disk fails), the rest can work together to remember what's missing.
    
4. **RAID level 6**: This is like having two friends (disks) who remember everything about your project. Even if you lose one friend or even two (two disks fail), the remaining friends can still help you remember and recreate your project.

```slide-note
page: 11
```
- RAID setups can be combined
- Let's assume we have a group of 4 disks
- And, for all files, we split them into blocks
	- Block 0 -> Disk 0
	- Block 1 -> Disk 1
	- Block 2 -> Disk 2
	- Block 3 -> Disk 3
	- Block 4 -> Disk 0
	- and so on
- This has a good access time, but if a disk fails everything is lost
- But we could add to this setup, by adding another 4 disks
	- These 4 extra disks will mirror our original 4 disks
- We get the benefits of both
	- However cost is high
- This is known as RAID (0 + 1)

```slide-note
page: 12-15
```
